Anthony de Mello has a simple parable about a snail
beginning its climb up a cherry tree on a windy day
in late spring:
Te sparrows on a neighbouring tree had a good laugh
at his expense.
Ten one few over and said, "Hey, blockhead, don't
you know there are no cherries on thistree?" Te litle
fellow did not stop as he replied, "Well, there will be
when I get there".
Te litle snail knows what it wants, not doubting that, 
by the end of itslong journey, the cherries will be ripe. 
To the mocking sparrows, its path is absurdly long. 
Tey don't realise that the path to perfection couldn't
be otherwise.
Here's someone whose dream has never changed: he's
always wanted to change livesfor the beter—not only
his own, but those of the people around him. And he
knows for himself that the path from the yesterday's
thinking to tomorrow's thinking is in "the long run". 
Ruben Vardanyan, impact investor and social entrepreneur, shares his thoughts on this and many other
things.
As a man of the world, I live on 
an airplane. Most likely everyone, 
taking of from the ground, is familiar with the feeling of gaining altitude. On the one hand, you realise 
what a huge expanse is below you, 
as if the horizon were expanding.
On the other, everything grows miniscule. And it turns out that space is 
playing hide-and-seek with you, not 
wishing to reveal its true essence, 
hiding the details.
It's reminiscent of the nature of space and time in 
the 21st century. Te world has suddenly turned out to 
be unexpectedly small—any geographical point can be 
reached. Time rushes ahead with such a speed, a whirlwind of political, scientifc, technological, and social 
changes. Te new rapidly becomes the familiar. Tat 
is, we live in an era of constant uncertainty, where the 
main quality is the ability to adapt. At the same time, 
we aren't at all prepared for the reality that the majority 
of responsibility in this new changing world, as well as 
the choice of our path, is placed on our individual shoulders. In addition, we've practically lost the protection
of commonplace institutions (the state, the church, 
family, international organisations), which are in crisis 
and aren't capable of responding to global challenges.
Not trusting the fundamental institutions, we place trust 
in people and communities, united in the systematic 
chaos that is social networking. We have the opportunity 
independently to determine vectors of movement—both 
for ourselves and for our communities—and we're not 
limited in our choice of ideals, life priorities, or spheres 
of activity. Tus, we're forced to make more independent 
decisions and we must be responsible for their consequences.
Klaus Schwab, founder of the Davos Forum, believes that "talentism" will replace capitalism. Creativity and innovation, rather than armament, natural resources, or capital, will be 
the driving force in the "era of adaptation," as he calls modernity. What prevents the process of 
transitioning to "talentism," to a world where an individual is of the highest value? Te mentality, 
probably, that determines the degree to which we're able to adapt to change. A person can be 
interested in the new, but ofen experiences stress when changes and uncertainty actually occur.
Unable or unwilling to adapt, people yearn for their former sense of security, when it was all 
decided for us—who we want to be, what path we're going to take, and even what books we 
read. But it's a challenge that's so important for us to accept—to learn to leave our cocoons, to 
go beyond our comfort zones.
We live in a really strange time. On the one hand, we have fantastic opportunities, on the 
other, people aren't always willing to take advantage of them and are scared to take their lives 
and the fate of the world into their own hands. One extreme results in globalisation and the 
erasure of all borders, the other in localisation and the desire to remain locked inside a bubble 
at all costs. Te only way for us to get through these stormy changes is to understand that you're 
a person of the world. You're responsible for it, you're the integral component, and at the same 
time you recognise your own uniqueness, a part of your unique identity, with its own origins 
and ancestral roots.
28
Armenia CONTINENT
29
Ruben Vardanyan
New creations aren't born at extreme polarities, 
but at the middle ground. It's natural therefore that
glocalisation, a balanced coexistence of multidirectional 
trends, should emerge as a viable alternative to globalisation, which deprives people of an individual identity, 
and localisation, closed as it is to the rest of the world. 
Tere's nothing new in the concept of "glocalisation". 
Some consider themselves cosmopolitans, citizens of 
the world; others inextricably link themselves with a 
certain territory, nation, or religion. But there are also 
those who consider themselves bound to everything that 
happens in the world and at the same time they know 
who they are, where they come from, and what their roots 
are, and they're proud of it. I'm confdent that the future 
is for those with a glocal mentality. Today, anywhere in 
the world, you can create an innovative centre, a project 
that can change the fate of the world.
Te percentage of glocal people in the world is still 
rather small. Society is still dominated by "local" people 
who live in their own space, leaving it seldom and only 
reluctantly. In the US, for example, about half of citizens 
haven't lef their own state, let alone the country. Out 
of Russia's 150 million citizens, only 16 million have 
international passports, and only fve million have been 
abroad in the last year. All the same, the world today is 
moved precisely by glocal people.
Te glass is either half empty or half full—it's a matter of how you perceive life and the world. By and large, 
we don't have a huge repertoire of diferent behaviours. 
You're either the object of change, or else you're the
subject. You can try to fence yourself of from the world 
and hide away in your own bubble. You can be aware
of the changes around you and try to adapt to them, 
sensing your inability to infuence anything. But you can 
also become the engine of change based on the resources 
you have. People tend to choose whatever will make them 
the most comfortable. And yet I'm sure that anyone can 
infuence the future of the world.
For me and others who think like 
me, the Aurora Humanitarian Initiative has come to represent one of the 
means of infuencing the world. Te 
project's origins are in its founder's 
family history, including that of my 
own. Aurora is Gratitude in Action. 
Created on behalf of the survivors 
of the Armenian Genocide and in 
gratitude to their saviours, it seeks to
empower modern-day saviours to 
ofer life and hope to those in urgent 
need of basic humanitarian aid and 
thus continue the cycle of giving internationally. Tere are many horrors 
and injustices in the world. Many 
believe it's the duty of the government and international institutions 
to combat them. But there exist people who will assume an active position, who believe that we ourselves 
can and must do something so that 
crimes against humanity won't be 
repeated. I hope that Aurora helps 
people understand that each of us 
is able to cause shifs in atitude towards humanitarian problems worldwide, that society's passive sympathy 
should transform into action.
31
Ruben Vardanyan
 — We live in a really
 strange time.
 On the one hand,
 we have fantastic
 opportunities, on the
 other, people aren't
 always willing to take
 advantage of them
 and are scared to take
their lives and the
 fate of the world
 into their own hands>.
(Ruben Vardanyan)
30
Armenia CONTINENT
Te Aurora Prize for Awakening 
Humanity recognises modern day 
heroes and the exceptional impact 
their actions have made on pre
-
serving human life and advancing 
humanitarian causes in the face of 
adversity. 
Te 
frst prize was awarded 
in 2016 to Marguerite Barankitse. 
She saved roughly 30,000 children 
and took care of orphans and refu
-
gees during the years of civil war in 
Burundi. When the war broke out, 
Marguerite, a Tutsi, tried to hide
72 of her closest Hutu neighbours 
to keep them safe from persecution. Tey were, however, discovered and 
executed, while she was forced to 
watch. In spite of this, Marguerite 
continued to help, guided by her own 
values that considered it important 
to save people from cruelty and vio
-
lence. "When you have these values 
of compassion," she says, "nothing 
can stop you".
The threat to personal safety 
didn't stop Dr. Tom Catena either. 
He is the sole doctor permanently 
based in Sudan's Nuba Mountains, 
home to about 750,000 people. 
When the fighting began, he was 
encouraged to evacuate, but he
insisted on staying. Humanitarian 
aid scarcely reaches this region at 
all. "Dr. Tom," as he's a
fectionate
-
ly known, is on call 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week, treating up to 500 
patients a day. Such has been his life 
for the past nine years. Dr. Catena 
has to do more than a thousand op
-
erations every year. An American, 
he went to a foreign country, where 
he had no relatives or acquaintances 
and nothing to connect him to the 
place. Nothing, that is, except the 
people who needed him. It's import
-
ant for him to help them survive in 
the dire conditions of war. And it's 
necessary for the world to learn about 
such people.
Aurora helps bring these inspiring stories to millions 
of people. Award nominations include those who perform 
an extraordinary act of humanity, and are submi
ted 
by 
flling in the online form at the o
fcial Aurora Prize 
website. Eighteen experts from di
ferent countries then 
assess the nominations, a
fer which a list of 25 candi
-
dates is compiled. Members of the Selection Commi
tee
review a shortlist of candidates, drawing upon their own 
expertise, nomination forms and additional information 
assembled by the Secretariat to determine the Aurora 
Prize 
fnalists. 
Te entire selection process is supervised 
by the Aurora Prize's Independent Observer. 
Tere are 
no losers or winners; rather, the laureate of the prize is 
just given the opportunity to do a li
tle extra.
For the 2018 Aurora Prize entries were submi
ted 
from 115 countries. It goes to show that the situations 
in which people show their best qualities happen all 
over the world. And there's such joy in 
fnding out that 
the actual stories of people saving others in all sorts
of places manage to surpass even what you could imagine. 
So it has been and always will be.
Maybe if each of us leaves our familiar comfort zone 
without fear of exposing our face to the wind of change, 
maybe if we trust ourselves to determine our horizons in 
this strange and beautiful world, at once tiny and in
fnite, 
then our fear of change will disappear. Because, doing so, 
we learn how to shape the present and create the future.
Illustration
Ekaterina Bernyak
32
Armenia CONTINENT
Aliona
Doletskaya
Not a fairy tale,
but Life Photography
Vladimir Vasilchikov
34
Russia CONTINENT Aliona Doletskaya
Thank the Creator that there are people who like
discovering new things. The six days of creation
are work, deeply engaging work, with the seventh,
usually, being for relaxation and rest, but sometimes, 
for redrawing what has been created. Vogue created
the woman, and Russian Vogue—Doletskaya. In her
six days, she has created several years of Interview, 
lovely black-and-white drawings, cooking publications; 
she has dreamt of fight, read Montaigne, and now
has given us a new book, entirely unrelated to cooking, Not Life, But A Fairy Tale. While for Montaigne,
"to philosophise is to learn to die," for Doletskaya, it is
learning how to live. Her column is a diverse mosaic, 
on everything from the ancient Greeksto the Internet. 
But the thread running through all of it is an insatiable
curiosity for life, people, and herself. In this, she sees
roses growing under the snow on Kaluga Highway; 
she rides in a fying taxi; she'll write a book with the
recipe "How to Learn to Love Life, and Turn Utopia
Into Reality". Tough this, as usual, is on her seventh
day, instead of rest.
At the very point of origin for the 
project of utopia, there stood Plato. 
Labelling it as "a place that was not," 
he, though he didn't realise, opened 
the foodgates for a restless army of 
dreamers and visionaries for millennia to come. And this is natural—
people, unlike animals, have the gif
of dreaming. It could be said that the 
world we create is a projection of our 
desires. To dream is wondrous —
to realise those dreams is difcult, 
and at times, impossible. Most of
El Lisitsky's projects remained on
paper. We look at his prouns and 
think: what striking beauty! Maybe
someday… And Zaha Hadid has 
done it. Elon Musk has done it.
Our technologies today are 
bricks, taking us further than we've 
yet been. It's another issue that there 
are people who just bounce up and 
down on these bricks, tweeting this, 
liking that, following whoever. But 
there are people who use these bricks 
to build major projects, cultivating 
them; and the fact that they cultivate them today, dreaming of what 
will be done tomorrow, is incredibly 
thrilling.
Tough there is, however, one problem: technologies have been coming into being too quickly for us to 
learn to make use of them wisely—that is, ethically, 
humanely, with dignity. And there's the risk of making 
a lot of stupid things. Elon Musk even said that in our 
excessive enthusiasm for artifcial intelligence, we risk 
losing something important.
How many great thinkers have told us that while 
money is essential, there are things of much greater signifcance? Montaigne wrote about friendship so accurately, that reading him today, you feel like you have to 
call your closest friend immediately and tell them that 
friendship isn't about sending emojis, it's about THIS! 
His work goes straight to the heart, and you think, "Oh 
my god, three centuries! Tree hundred years! And we're 
still trying to master such simple things".
We, for some reason, drill the ocean in search of oil, 
and get thousands of stunned, suicidal dolphins washing 
up on shore, no longer able to live in the places they've 
inhabited for centuries. With our intelligence, we reduce 
beings who've been here far longer than us, and who, 
inhabiting a much greater portion of the Earth than 
we do, are in fact its real owners. It's we who are their 
guests. And now, as guests, we've managed to come here 
and send the whole place to hell. We've made as much 
money as we can, as quickly as we can, and destroyed 
the planet in the process.
It's a hard point we're at in the world, where nobody 
likes each other, and from my point of view, we've entered into an unprecedented antagonism. I never thought 
I would hear someone on TV, from our ofcial press, 
say of America that it was a "country of freaks and reptiles". And they have similar broadcasts about us. It was 
practically yesterday that the world was bathing in the 
euphoria of globalisation, making friends with each other, 
travelling wherever they wanted. Five or six years ago, 
I met with a group of philosophers, one of whom claimed 
that very soon, we'd see a colossal bout of nationalism 
and isolation, raging and severe. Everyone else laughed 
and said that he'd had a few too many. It turns out he was 
right. Does it mean that humanity in general is prone to 
wave-like, or, as is ofen said, spiral, development in our 
thinking? First friendship, then hatred, frst technology, 
then we all head for the woods to build our farms, milk 
our cows, and make our cheese. Perhaps utopias never 
become reality because people can't make up their minds 
about what they want?
36
Russia CONTINENT
37
Aliona Doletskaya
Every day, I'm dreaming about something, and ofen, it's about the simplest things. In
December, for example, we'll all be overwhelmed by the snow on Kaluga Highway, and I'll look 
at the snowdrifs and dream about how the roses will blossom on the ground at the botom of 
that huge hill. Small desires like that. Or the universal dream that we'll all someday be able to 
fy. Air taxis already seem to exist. And of course, when everyone was still listening to music on 
CDs, fash drives were already ready to go. I'm sure there are alternative energy projects already 
fully worked out, but they're held back by business and profts. If someone's siting on oil, why 
does he need windmills?
Te dream that most warms my heart is that of drawing out the utmost potential from within 
myself and in others, and fting it into our lives as much as can possibly be accommodated. For 
me, one of these great breakthroughs was when I, a person not at all inclined to draw, found 
myself in a group at the Drawer's Club, led by the artist Lavrenty Bruni —I was covering his 
work for a magazine. Lavrenty said to me, "enough already with your shooting—you write, you 
shoot, you write, you shoot—sit down and draw". But I'm all thumbs; how am I supposed to 
draw? He said that it wasn't about "being able" to draw, but about seeing, hearing, and fnding 
something on paper. I'll never forget this. I sat down, and I began to draw. And now, someone's 
hanging my work in their house and geting pleasure from it. If someone had said ten years ago 
that I would put out three cookbooks, my fnger would have been spiralling next to my temple. 
And then—bang! A breakthrough. Now I want to fy.
I like to confess my love for utopias. The book 
I published in December, Not Life, But A Fairy Tale, is, 
in fact, a utopia, but I'm trying to drape it with reality. 
Te title itself is utopian. A lot of people will think, "Ooo
Doletskaya, this isn't life, it's a fairy tale, really". But it's 
about the present, it's about reality. And I want to allow 
the reader to see himself in this book. Like when they 
were still recovering from Soviet life, Russian women, 
through magazines, were able to see themselves in a 
way that still seemed so remote and unthinkable in this 
country.
1998: Vogue Russia's frst marketing campaigns. 
I remember how, one day, two of the fve focus group 
participants answered the question about what Vogue 
is with the response: "It's cigaretes". And I then had 
thought that everyone, like me, was up in the clouds, and 
that they would all respond that Vogue was a magazine. 
And yet, Vogue isn't just a magazine, it's an overall life 
aesthetic. I came up with it myself. At that time, there 
was both Elle and Harper's Bazaar, but it seemed to me 
inappropriate to write, "Five Red Dresses Of the Season" 
on the covers. I was certain that, despite the fact that 
Russian women had said that Vogue was cigaretes, they 
weren't desirous of edifcation. Tey wanted to know how 
to think and feel for themselves. Tey just needed a jolt 
of taste, aesthetic, intellectual, informative.
 — People, unlike animals,
 have the gif
 of dreaming.
 It could be said
 that the world 
 we create is
 a projection
 of our desires>.
(Aliona Doletskaya)
38
Russia CONTINENT
39
Aliona Doletskaya
Illustration
Aliona Doletskaya
It's wonderful when people tell me, "Oh, but we 
grew up reading your Vogue!" It's the "your Vogue" that 
does it. Because the "
fve dresses of the season" has re
-
turned. Every other cover is feathers, rhinestones, chi
fon.
It's a shame. Media is currently undergoing birth pangs, 
which, as we know, can end in di
ferent ways: a child can 
be born healthy, sick, or even dead.
I'll go to a cafe and see a young mother with a one-year-old who can't 
yet formulate a complete sentence, but he already has a screen in front
of him
—it's scary. Friends come and ask: "My kid is always on her phone, 
what should I do?". We need to replace phones with something else, but it 
turns out that that something else isn't so easy to come by. We have to give 
ourselves to them, but how is that even possible, when you yourself aren't 
pu
ting that same toy down? People have become di
fcult to communi
-
cate with; we all have a time limit. Everyone tolerates each other for a li
tle 
while, and then they reach for their phone
—they suddenly have a message,
or they have to answer a call. It's a strange phenomenon, which I look at with 
great curiosity. And if I have any big dream, I'd put it like this: I'd wish for 
my curiosity never to fade. I'd want to know what that kid, the one tapping 
his screen, would say to me if I returned to that same café, ten years down 
the road. And I feel that when a person ceases to be interested in the world 
around him, then hes no longer really alive.
But the idea of eternal life doesn't interest me. It seems to me that human
-
ity hasn't really grasped this utopian idea. Perhaps, I remain con
fdent
—the 
Lord knows how much time we have le
f here. Even if he's the only one who 
does. In the meantime, we'll stick around and dream.
 
— When everyone was still listening to music on CDs,
 
fash drives were already ready to go. I'm sure there are alternative
 energy projects already
 fully worked out, but they're
 held back by business and pro
fts>. 40
Russia CONTINENT
Rocco
Forte
Sir
Return to the Hotel Photography
Rocco Forte Hotels
42
Great Britain CONTINENT Sir Rocco Forte
As St. Francis of Assisi once said, 
"All saints can do miracles, but few
of them can keep a hotel" (from the
notebooks of Mark Twain). If we believe Saint Francis and the American
satirist, and each of them knew the
truth about miracles and hotels, then
Sir Rocco Forte, the creator of the
Rocco Forte Hotel network, has
managed a great deal. With elegance
and professionalism, he transforms
decent hotels into ideal spaces that
beckon you to come in and discover
happiness for yourself.
If your House is a place you feel 
good in, then it'll be your fortress in 
any of life's circumstances. It's the 
place you want to return to. But people are eager to move around. Tere 
is a traveller inside of each of us. Te 
house remains, awaiting our return. 
But there's also the road ahead, and 
it should include a temporary home 
space, somewhere we can feel calm 
and comfortable. I strive to make a 
space like that in my hotels. It should 
be a place you want to return to again 
and again.
Te philosophy behind Rocco Forte Hotels is also 
that they should refect their country of location. Tat's 
why the diferent branches don't resemble one other. Tey 
should be warm and hospitable. Te hotel staf should 
be professional, but behave in a friendly manner at the 
same time. I don't appreciate when hotels have a highly 
efcient staf that still remain very distant and aloof. 
When our staf win over our clients, I know our clients 
feel truly at home with us.
Each hotel, like a home, is flled with energy and the 
philosophy of the people behind the space's atmosphere. 
My sister's involved in the decoration of the hotel, fnding 
artifacts, local items, and so on that end up creating a 
warm and comfortable environment. On the other hand, 
my hotel's service philosophy comes from me: it's what 
I'm always talking about and something that I promote. 
I believe a hotel should have a soul, the warmth and harmony that makes a Hotel into a Home, temporary though 
it is. Sometimes, you'll go into a hotel, and it seems dead, 
and cold, and you feel you're not wanted there. Te soul 
isn't quite explicable. It's in the atmosphere. You can go 
to a dinner party, and everything is working just fne,
or you can go to a dinner party, and everyone hates each 
other. Obviously, staf is a very important part of creating 
this atmosphere: employees must be open to the client. 
And guests, of course, are another important part of it.
Many years ago, the Plaza Athenee in Paris was part of the Trust Us Forte group, and then 
the frst oil price increase occurred. As a result, a lot of guests from the Middle East came to 
Paris and stayed at the hotel. All of these guests had bodyguards dressed in white Arab robes. 
Te guests would sit in the Plaza Athenee gallery, and there would be a lot of them in there, 
taking tea, until it got to the point where it looked like an Arab souk, in the gallery, in the
centre of Paris, among the other European guests. It created an incongruous atmosphere with 
the rest of the hotel. Our philosophy is to create hotels that are a refection of their location. In 
this instance, the general manager, very courageously, requested that, while siting in the gallery, 
the guests wear western coats. Something like that can completely change the atmosphere of 
the hotel, and it's important to respect the atmosphere of the hotel and the country it's in. I love 
my work, and so every guest counts.
44
Great Britain CONTINENT
45
Sir Rocco Forte
My fascination with the creation of hotels began in childhood.
I remember when I was 13, my parents and I went to Cortina, a ski resort 
near Venice, to ski. My father knew Giuseppe Cipriani, the founder of
Harry's Bar, who had just organised the construction of the Cipriani Hotel 
in Venice. 
Te hotel hadn't opened yet, and he opened a wing of the hotel just 
for my father and us, the children. We were the 
frst ever guests in that hotel.
My 
frst stay in a luxury hotel was in the Excelsior, in Rome. I was eight 
or nine years old, and I'd never stayed in a grand hotel before. 
Ten, the
Excelsior was a special hotel: everything seemed so big, just enormous to me, 
a child. 
Tere was this luxury suite… I have very strong memories of these 
two episodes, and I wanted to create the same beauty and comfort myself. 
Now, of course, I understand that, apart from beauty, luxury, and comfort, 
it's all in the service, in going beyond expectations.
I o
fen receive le
ters from clients telling me how wonderfully some 
particular thing was done. If a client su
fered a tragedy while staying at the 
hotel, for example, and he or she was really well looked a
fer by the sta
f, who 
were very considerate. Customers lose something, we 
fnd it for them and 
send it back. 
Te best hotel has to achieve perfection in service. 
Tere should 
be no grounds for complaints from customers, and that is very di
fcult to 
implement. 
Te luxury hotel is all about service. At 
frst glance, the dream 
of the ideal hotel always seems to be a utopia, but it's so beautiful when the 
hotel you created actually begins to resemble that dreamlike, ideal image 
of the Hotel. 
Tat's when it becomes the Home for your guests. My dream 
is to see my children running the business and somehow ge
ting involved 
comfortably running it together. 
Tat's maybe an impossible dream.
Doing things I like doing makes 
me happy, so I devote my life to 
things that I enjoy. Still, if a beautiful 
girl still responds to me, or if I have 
a good round of golf, that makes me 
very happy. May God give the oppor
-
tunity to be that happy for as long as 
possible. And to make others happy.
 
—
Tere is a traveller inside of each of us. Te house remains, awaiting our return. But there's also the road ahead,
 and it should include a temporary
 home space, somewhere we can feel calm
 and comfortable. I strive to make a space
 like that in my hotels. It should be
a place you want to return to again and again>.
46
Great Britain CONTINENT
Illustration
Julia Semitko
Yan
Yanovsky
Together
Photography
Alexander Murashkin
48
Russia CONTINENT Yan Yanovsky
One person alone cannot bring
about Utopia, and neither can
societybe forced to work towards
one person's utopian vision.
Humanity will, necessarily, find
its way to the ideal, only once
it grasps that that consists
of individuals contributing
towards a whole — to a family,
to a country, to the Earth. How ofen
do we think to ourselves: "I'm just
a speck in the space; what chang- es could I possibly make? Our reg- ular columnist, the fnancier, and
co-founder of the Druzya (Friends) 
philanthropic organisation, Yan
Yanovsky writes of his motivation
to move in the direction of utopia.
There can be no ideal world, 
because the idea is subjective, 
and diferent for everyone —it's a
refection of each person's ambitions, 
fears, complexes, education. I think 
what's important isn't my envisioned 
ideal, or yours, but rather our direction. We can't change everything. 
But it's important that we agree, that 
we understand we're indeed moving 
in the same direction. Even if our 
ultimate visions of the world difer. 
A boat can't have a tailwind without 
a destination.
I want to leave this world in 
beter shape than it was in when my 
parents gave it to me. People take the 
path of least resistance, and I, like 
anyone, try to fgure out how my efforts will result in the greatest yield. 
In many respects, I entered the feld 
of philanthropy precisely because of 
this. Tere are many possible ways to 
make the world a beter place, but I, 
for example, am not a scientist. I can't 
do much in the feld of knowledge. 
Nor am I a doctor; it's not mine to 
cure diseases. But I retain the illusion 
that for me, that possibility lies in 
philanthropy.
Being an economist, I'm very close to the ideas of 
Adam Smith and Roberto Ricardo, and the theory of 
absolute advantage: that each individual should be doing 
what he is an expert at, or at least what he is beter at than 
others. For me, professionalism is the key to success. In 
philanthropy, people usually become involved because 
of their emotions: the loss of a loved one, or an incurable 
disease. Tey feel the need to help, or to forget. Unfortunately, while feelings do generate motivation, they're 
not the best drivers of efectiveness. My approach is to 
treat it as a profession. Tere are very few professionals 
in this sphere: you can't get a degree in philanthropy. So 
the Druzya (Friends) Foundation is creating a program 
from scratch which will allow people from outside the 
feld to learn how it works, and how to approach it professionally, while also giving the people already doing 
this work an opportunity to increase their efectiveness.
Te Vera (Faith) Foundation is a good example. 
When we were just starting up, the team was great, but 
its efectiveness when it came to fundraising, working 
with donors, general operations, internal procedures and 
processes, lef much to be desired. A utopia of philanthropy? Far from it. But now it's one of the top three 
in Russia. What's made us successful is that our staf is 
professional, with the competence necessary to develop 
the organisation. And Utopia became a reality within 
the framework of that foundation.
50
Russia CONTINENT
51
Yan Yanovsky
It used to be that society just 
didn't want to talk about the sort
of thing the Vera Foundation does.
In general, people try to protect 
themselves from the idea of death 
and everything connected to it. I'm 
no exception to this. When I frst 
joined the board, I made every possible excuse to avoid my frst visit to 
hospice. It took me more than a year 
of self-work, an internal dialogue, to 
fnd the strength. It was a very difcult step. Years have now passed, and 
society has come a long way; the topic of palliative care is no longer taboo, 
and people's level of engagement has 
fundamentally altered. Tey call us: 
"We want to help! How can we help? 
What do you need help with?
Tere are a lot of diferent ways to help, and we've 
come up with one more. Take a professional in marketing, law, or media, for example, who wants to volunteer 
with a charity, isn't ready to scrub foors in the hospice 
centre, but is willing to volunteer in the context of his 
profession, and has, say, two hours a week, or fve hours 
a month. Druzya is launching a project called ProCharity. It's a platform where professionals and businesses, 
both small and large, can make donations in the form of 
expertise in various felds. Te platform connects these 
donations to requests made by charitable organisations 
and creates a team to do the work. Tough there's still
a problem: you help the fund, you do some work, but you 
don't receive any thanks. Te money was received, the 
help was given, and everything was already taken care of. 
We want everyone on the platform to receive gratitude. 
In diferent ways, our partners will say "thank you" to 
everyone who ofers up their precious time.
My utopian idea is that within a few years, an IT 
company in India, using our platform, would be able 
to help sort out an issue for a charity in Russia, and
a Russian company could help a foundation in Egypt
or Australia, and so on. We want to erase national borders 
in the feld of philanthropy. I'm confdent we can do it. 
Te most important thing is that associations from other 
countries work with us on this initiative.
I once prepared for an exam that included an essay section. I've had a great 
many exams in my life, but somehow I remember the topic of this particular 
test—I ofen think back to it, discussing it with myself again. Te question 
was this: why do schools teach children how nations difer from one another, 
and do not teach what they all have in common? It seems very important 
to me. And I think this is what will put us on course for a utopian society.
 — I want
 to leave this
 world in beter
 shape than
 it was in
when my parents
 gave it to me>.
(Yan Yanovsky)
52
Russia CONTINENT
53
Yan Yanovsky
When I'm asked what Druzya's purpose is, I respond 
that its goal is to no longer be necessary. It's di
fcult to 
expect that society will be able to solve all its problems 
by itself, because it has a lot of them. But an ideal society 
is one that can approach doing so without burdening one 
group of people more than another. American citizens 
paying taxes, living the last thirty or ffy years outside 
the country
—this isn't an ideal picture. 
Tey appear to 
be carrying other people's burden. In an ideal society, 
people shouldn't do things just because; they should 
do things because they're motivated to. It's not about 
consciousness, it's about motivation.
I'll draw a parallel. Any employee who works for me, for the foundation, consciously makes 
the choice to do so. But my task, my responsibility, is to properly motivate him. I have to 
fnd the 
key that will give him the opportunity to unlock himself and deliver his very best. And I think 
that the state's role isn't to be society's policeman, but to be its motivator, motivating society and 
each one of us to make a reasonable contribution to its development. 
Tis is my utopia. Almost 
everyone has the ability to do more for society, but we don't. And it's not because we can't, or 
we don't want to, but because we don't believe it'll make a di
ference. We are de-motivated.
If you think about it, it's very simple to say to an unemployed person: here's some money. But 
look for the key to unlock that something inside him, and the pre
fx "un-" will fall right o
f. Look.
 
— I think that the state's role
 isn't to be society's policeman,
 but to be its motivator, motivating society
 and each one of us
 to make a reasonable contribution
 to its development.
 
Tis is my utopia>.
Illustration
Alina Galaktionova
54
Russia CONTINENT
Vitalik
Buterin
Te ffh element
of blockchain
56
Canada CONTINENT Vitalik Buterin
Te world is becoming more and more
digital, and people continue to wonder
whether or not artifcial intelligence is a
good thing. A few years ago, philosopher
Nick Bostrom claimed humans are the
least reliable system. Realising our unreliability, we continue to strive to preserve
humanity's existence on Earth, even aswe
multiply new technologies. Te groundbreaking public Ethereum platform is
a reliable system that is a glorifcation
of the human—the transparency of all
actions. Ethereum co-founder Vitalik
Buterin is now standing on the threshold
of a new world, open and fair, one whose
code, four years ago, he wrote himself.
I like building things that have never been built 
before. Te creation of an open and universal blockchain 
platform, which is already in the process of transforming 
our entire fnancial landscape, is my mission, my idea, 
what I'm aiming for. Today, Ethereum's capital amounts 
to tens of billions of dollars, but the money aspect is 
what interests me least. Te platform demonstrates 
the impulse of the new, independent, and progressive 
movement that's happening worldwide. Tere will be 
an inevitable global change that will lead us to a beter, 
more transparent world structure, one that I've always 
dreamed of, as have millions of others all over the world.
My early childhood was spent in Kolomna, near 
Moscow. Around the age of six, my parents and I moved 
to Canada. I had a few hobbies at that age, like playing 
the cello and memorising the digits of pi. Some learn 
the work of Pushkin, and I learned numbers. I was
always surrounded by them. So it seemed only natural that coding would appear in my life when I was 
just ten. I had run into a problem: playing World of 
Warcraf, a computer game I liked, it was impossible 
to buy weapons and equipment without money. I had 
some pocket money, of course, but I wanted more, and 
I had neither bank card nor bank account. And there are 
millions of other people in this very situation. Having 
discovering anarchist literature early on, I realised even 
then that, if money is power, and politics is engaged 
in the organisation of power, it works out that those 
who are in charge of money are those who rule. Tat's 
what atracted me to Bitcoin, and there was the clear 
realisation that payment without intermediaries was 
possible. But I was troubled by how expensive and unsafe those payments were—no one would write their 
home address down on a bank note