When the Ratan of Tata group paid 
a surprise visit to RSS HQ at 
Mahal and Reshimbaug, Nagpur 
and met with RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat, 
many highbrows went up at the number of 
places--media, BJP HQ and industrial 
houses-- closely watching the Tata-Cyrus war. 
As usual the faceless spokesperson of RSS 
Manmohan Vaidya, a known Modi 
baiter, dismissed it as a “courtesy 
visit”. Obviously we know, no Tata 
company is supplying full pants to RSS. But 
what was the agenda? According to business 
circles in India’s financial capital, Ratan Tata could be in 
trouble for some of his international business transactions gone 
wrong beyond repair. Cyrus could be privy to some of them by 
now and will leave no court unturned to nail Ratan. Now who 
will insulate the Tata group’s breakdown from the Mistry? One 
paid 
at
Nagpur 
gwat, 
mber of 
al 
yrus war. 
RSS
till August. 
g within the
on within 
nt. There is
mitra 
ppy with the 
Odisha, is 
lm star 
t, the names 
ere is
-
of Ratan’s many ‘friends’, Shaina NC, a 
fashion designer, BJP spokesperson and fund 
raiser, aspiring South Mumbai candidate and 
daughter of Nana Chudasama, former Sheriff 
of Mumbai came handy. Working her way up 
the political ladder she had befriended a 
powerful politician from Maharashtra 
close to the RSS chief. All that 
Ratan Tata did was press the right 
buttons and the next day he was 
kneeling before the statue of RSS 
founder at Reshimbaug. He is understood 
to have been ‘highly appreciative’ of RSS work 
in the areas of education and social work in tribal areas 
and reportedly promised to un-cap CSR funds to the RSS. This 
done, the RSS will apparently put in a kind word to the 
concerned quarters to have a sympathetic view of the doyen of 
Parsi community. g
The RSS connection
ratan tata visits nagpur
EYES WIDE SHUT
economy prabhat kumar
8 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
Demonetisation: 
The jury is still out
The three tests of success or otherwise of the move of demonetisation would 
be peoples’ reaction to it, the result of UP elections and the widening of tax 
base within a reasonable period
WHEN we are confronted with 
the evidence in any matter, 
for example a personal or a 
political issue, the cognitive process in 
our brain is immediately activated. But 
surprisingly, the neural circuits in the 
brain that are normally involved in 
reasoning or logic do not participate 
in this process. In fact, when the 
brain arrives at a certain conclusion 
which makes us emotionally 
comfortable, we get the rewards 
in terms of joy or pleasure and get 
massively stuck to that conclusion 
as our own view. This is the finding 
of a scientific study reported in the 
Scientific American recently.
permanent than death?’
The other joins in, ‘verily it can 
be said that we have been castrated’; 
‘the government owes an explanation 
to the people of India for their 
enormous bungle’.
Another passes the judgment, ‘it is 
a self imposed crisis for political 
benefit’. And the whole debate is put 
to rest by yet another, ‘Demonetisation 
has been an unmitigated disaster, 
which has hit the poor and middle 
class very hard. It has actually opened 
new avenues of corruption. It can only 
be supported by admirers of you know 
who’. Period.
Surprisingly, these otherwise 
Perhaps this hypothesis explains 
the obdurate extreme views some of 
my senior colleagues hold concerning 
the dress, gait or stubble of the Prime 
Minister. These worthy gentlemen 
leave no opportunity to berate the 
decision of the Prime Minister to 
replace high denomination currency. 
They see no merit whatsoever in 
the original idea aimed at exposing 
black money stocked by a large 
number of people.
‘We need to focus on people’s 
woes,’ says one of them, ‘disappointed 
that many of us have remained silent 
on that course or dismissing it as temporary inconvenience; what’s more 
www.indianbuzz.com 9 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017
perfectly rational individuals do not 
belong to any political party. They 
belong to the highest brand of the 
civil service and are expected to be 
discerning, non-partisan and objective. They have in the past adorned 
positions of great responsibility in the 
government and have carried several 
critical operations to successful resolution with their wise counsel. Still, 
they seem to be genetically averse to 
anything Modi says or does.
Despite entreaties from their 
peers to moderate their severely 
stubborn views in the interest of a 
more informed debate, they keep 
screaming ‘murder of the Constitution’ and ‘deathblow to democracy’. 
Perhaps they would be well advised 
to recycle their emotionally 
comforting judgments through their 
reasoning neutrons.
In my view, the tardy pace of 
replacement of currency notes, 
collusive acts of sundry bank officials 
with criminal elements for funneling out new currency, avoidable 
adverse effect on millions of small 
entrepreneurs and traders, and 
suffering of almost every citizen in 
trying to withdraw his own money 
from the bank are real problems in 
effective implementation of the 
decision to delegitimise old `1000 
and `500 currency bills. Having 
worked in the government for a long 
time, I am also aware that the 
challenge could have been met 
satisfactorily by astute planning and 
efficient management; and, therefore, 
to an extent everyone involved in 
making the decision of demonetisation and its implementation is to be 
held responsible.
BUT by refusing to engage with 
‘admirers of you know who’ 
constructively, in my view, these 
liberal intellectuals are losing their 
plot owing to their strident obduracy.
Of course, the government has 
taken an uncertain step in an unchartered direction. The initial avowed 
purpose of blocking black wealth did 
not prove successful. A few much 
graver challenges are also lurking in 
the shadows if the government fails to 
put its house in order. Reestablishing 
faith in the currency and restoring the 
credibility of State institutions are 
going to be tested in coming weeks 
and months. Perhaps for the first time 
in its history, fingers are being raised 
on the functioning of the Reserve 
Bank of India.
In my view, the three tests of 
success or otherwise of the move of 
demonetisation would be peoples’ 
reaction to it, the result of UP 
elections and the widening of tax base 
within a reasonable period. Of these, 
the first has already been successfully 
passed by the government as there 
has not been much public disturbance 
or violence despite obvious inconvenience to millions.
However, the jury is still out and it 
is perhaps a little too early to deliver 
the final verdict.
Endpoint: Should I too re-evaluate 
my strongly held views by routing 
them through reasoning neurons and 
risk getting emotionally disturbed? g
The writer was the Cabinet Secretary and 
the first Governor of Jharkhand. He can be 
reached at pkumar1511@hotmail.com
Having worked in the 
government for a long time, 
I am aware that the 
challenge could have 
been met satisfactorily by 
astute planning and 
efficient management
COVER STORY
corporate fracas
10 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
The Ratan Tata-Cyrus 
Mistry story began on a 
wrong note, albeit in a 
subconscious manner. 
They both felt that since 
they had worked 
together for years, they 
understood each other 
and the bonhomie would 
continue forever. But, 
human psychology works 
differently—it changes 
rapidly when one is 
given powers, and the 
other has to give up his 
erstwhile powers.
by ALAM SRINIVAS
ROME wasn’t built in months. 
Nor was it destroyed in months. 
The same is the case with the 
spat between Ratan Tata, interim 
Chairman, Tata Group, and Cyrus 
Mistry, former Chairman. The story 
starts, ironically, when Ratan decided to search for his successor. The 
year: 2010. The five members of 
the selection committee included 
Ratan’s loyalists—NA Soonawala, RK 
Krishna Kumar, the UK-based Lord 
Bhattacharya, Shrin Bharucha, and, 
of course, Cyrus, whose family owns 
18 per cent in Tata Sons, the group’s 
holding company. 
Cut to November 23, 2011. After 
18 meetings in search of a professional outsider to carry on the almost 
150-year-old Tata legacy, the committee selected Cyrus, who was already an 
insider as Tata Sons’ director. He was 
actually an insider-outsider, possibly 
TATA-MISTRY FEUD
the worst combination for a successor 
of a $100-billion business empire. An 
outsider invariably comes prepared; 
he knows that as a professional and 
non-owner of a family-owned group, 
he can go thus far, and no more. 
An insider is invariably a loyalist 
and follower, who will look up to 
the owner; even better, he may be a 
part-owner himself and, hence, is part 
of the family. 
Both an insider and outsider can 
turn rogue. They can develop or nurture their own ambitions, try to usurp 
the group, or develop an urge to leave 
a new legacy behind. However, the 
chances of these happening with an 
insider-outsider are larger. Being an 
What lies 
www.indianbuzz.com 11 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017
sider is a tricky person to deal with. 
The owner is always scared that the 
latter, as an insider, will try to take 
over the businesses—Ratan did claim 
that Cyrus wanted to control the 100-
odd operating arms of the group. He 
is also nervous that as an outsider, 
the successor will want to undo past 
decisions—Cyrus did wish to sell the 
insider, he will feel that he owns the 
empire. Being an outsider, he will 
wish to change things around and 
attempt to transform the group to 
prepare it for the future. An insideroutsider has the best of both worlds, 
which can quickly shift to the worst of 
both. This is what happened to Cyrus. 
For an owner too, an insider-outEuropean steel business and wind 
down the operations of the Nano 
car, both of which were Ratan’s 
dream projects. 
So, the story began on a wrong note, 
a sour one, albeit in a subconscious 
manner. In a Freudian manner, both 
Ratan and Cyrus repressed these negatives. They both felt that since they 
had worked together for years, they 
understood each other and the bonhomie would continue forever. They 
should have read more of Sigmund 
Freud and Carl Jung to understand 
how human psychology works, and 
how it changes rapidly when one is 
given powers, and the other has to 
give up his erstwhile powers. We all 
know that power corrupts—in fact, in 
both ways, i.e. additional powers and 
subtraction of powers. 
T
O be fair to Ratan, he had a clue 
about the workings of the mind 
of an insider-outsider. So, as an 
owner, he designed things to retain 
control over his empire. Cyrus worked 
with Ratan for a year, and only took 
over formally in December 2012. But 
during this period, Ratan had already 
impressed upon the newcomer that he 
would not have full control; his powers would be restricted by the owner. 
The idea was to protect the ownership 
of the sprawling empire. 
The ball was put in play even 
before the new successor took over 
in December 2012. But, before that, 
it is imperative to understand who 
owns Tata Sons. Seven Tata Trusts 
together own almost two-thirds of the 
shares of Tata Sons, the group’s holding company—the shares are “held by 
(seven) philanthropic trust endowed 
by members of the Tata family,” says 
the Tata Group website. It adds, “The 
largest of these trusts are Sir Dorabji 
Trust (stake: almost 28 per cent) and 
the Sir Ratan Tata Trust (over 23.5 
 behind?
COVER STORY
corporate fracas
12 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
per cent), which were created by the 
families of the sons of Jamsetji Tata, 
the Founder.” Ratan headed these 
two trusts. 
In 2012, Tata Sons’ Articles of 
Association was changed to protect 
Ratan’s holdings and wealth. Any 
removal or appointment of chairman 
now required mandatory approval by 
all the directors that were installed 
by the Tata Trusts. In addition, the 
Trusts had the right to appoint a third 
of the board directors. This was done 
with Cyrus’ okay. Negotiations were 
on for further changes. In 2014, a new 
arrangement was in place between 
the owner and the successor. 
UNDER the new deal, the Tata 
Trusts got more powers. Their 
directors virtually had veto 
powers over the group’s strategic decisions—mergers, takeovers, investments and fund-raising. The majority 
of the Trusts’ nominees, two out of 
three, had to approve such decisions, 
even if the board’s majority had done 
it. They also had veto powers over the 
annual and five-year business plans. 
The owner made sure that the successor couldn’t take over his businesses. 
Still, as a professional, Ratan 
gave Cyrus enough freedom to take 
day-to-day and tactical decisions. In 
fact, in 2013, before the above agreement, the latter formed a committee 
to guide the group’s future. Apart 
from himself, who chaired it, it comprised five members, most of whom 
were his handpicked men. The Group 
Executive Council, as it was called, 
included Madhu Kannan, the former 
CEO of the Bombay Stock Exchange 
whose name will feature later in this 
saga. It was meant to provide strategic 
and operational support to Cyrus. 
The new die was set. The contours 
of the new relationship were established. And both the owner and the 
Timeline
October 24... Cyrus Mistry was removed from the post of Tata Sons 
chairman without any explanation.
October 25... Shapoorji Pallonji & Co kept their action secretive. Tata Group 
filed appeal in the Supreme Court, Bombay High Court and National 
Company Law Tribunal to ensure that Mistry doesn’t get an ex-parte order 
against his sacking.
October 26... Mystry wrote a scornful letter to board members. He 
elaborated in his letter about difficulties he faced during his tenure. SEBI 
asked for clarification from Ratan Tata over Mistry’s letter.
October 27... Air India looked into Mistry’s fraudulent transaction' of `22 
crore. Tata Sons responds to the letter, calls Mistry's claims 'unsubstantiated' 
and 'malicious' and that Mistry chaired the Board meet of Tata Global 
Beverages.
October 28... Mistry denied allegations of Board not consulted over 
purchase of Welspun Power. Mistry also says he is surprised with reasons 
that Tata gave for his removal.
October 29... Tata Group’s HR chief NS Rajan resigns from the company.
November 2... Ratan Tata wrote another mail to employees saying that 
removing Mistry was absolutely necessary for the future of Tata Group.
November 4... Tata Sons appoints S Padmanabhan to oversee HR functions. 
Mukund Rajan, former executive assistant of Ratan Tata, will be overseeing 
group operations in US, Singapore, Dubai and China alongwith ethics and 
sustainability duties.
November 5... Tata Motors defends its `1 lakh Nano car strategy, which 
Mistry had mentioned in his letter.
November 9... Tata Sons sacks Mistry as Chairman of TCS, replaced by 
Ishaat Hussain.
November 15… Tata Global Beverages sacks Mistry as Chairman, replaced 
by Harish Bhat.
November 21... Nusli Wadia, independent director in Tata Steel, Tata 
Motors and Tata Chemicals, serves defamation notice on Tata Sons’ board.
November 25… Tata Steel removes Mistry as Chairman, appoints 
independent director OP Bhatt in his place.
December 5... Mistry seeks government’s intervention to ‘remedy and repair 
breakdown’ in the governance of Trusts managing Tata Sons.
December 13... Mistry removed as TCS director after shareholders vote in 
EGM.
December 19... Mistry quits as director from boards of key operating Tata 
companies before scheduled EGMs; describes his sacking from Tata Sons as 
‘illegal coup’.
December 20... Mistry moves NCLT against Ratan Tata, Tata Sons and some 
of its directors.
December 23... Ratan Tata says ‘however painful’ the fight with Mistry may 
be, but ‘the truth will prevail’.
December 27... Tata Sons slaps legal notice on Mistry for alleged breach of 
confidentiality.
www.indianbuzz.com 13 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017
successor felt that they would live 
happily thereafter. Neither of them 
gave a damn about egos, shifting loyalties, baggage, legacy, trust, power, 
jealousy, and ambitions. But humans, 
even if they are billionaires and chairmen of powerful empires, live in an 
uncertain world where things change 
imperceptibly, and wreck havoc. 
Wings # 1: Dramatis directors 
One of the first signs were witnessed in 2013, when the Tata Trusts 
appointed new directors in Tata Sons. 
These included Nitin Nohria, Dean, 
Harvard Business School, and Vijay 
Singh, the former Defence Secretary, 
both of whom became hugely controversial after Cyrus’ dismissal. Cyrus 
had problems with them. Since both 
were Ratan’s confidantes, they had 
Ratan’s ears and advised him on most 
deals. This irked the new chairman. 
Cyrus wanted Ratan to deal with him, 
rather than through what the owner 
heard from Nohria and Singh. 
It was a classic insider-outsider 
mindset, who thought he was an 
insider and, thus, should have the 
owner’s ears. Cyrus thought that 
Singh was ‘un-Tata-like’, and wrongly 
advised Ratan. He revealed his feelings after his ouster. In a statement, 
he said that Singh, as the Defence 
Secretary, was involved in the scamtainted AugustaWestland chopper 
deal, which was signed by the previous UPA-2 regime, and cancelled 
by the present government. It was 
alleged that bribes were paid in the 
deal. Singh retorted that the deal 
was signed a year after he left, as 
the Defence Secretary, although the 
negotiations began during his tenure. 
Cyrus viewed Nohria as a thorn 
too. In his worldview, the Harvard 
Dean became the non-executive 
director only because of his friendship with Ratan. Years ago, in 2010, 
Ratan donated $50 million to the 
School, which was its largest gift from 
an international donor. Therein lay, 
according to Cyrus, the links between 
the former chairman and owner, and 
the new director. Yet again, it was a 
classic outsider’s view of an insideroutsider; it wasn’t a professional 
appointment. It is a different case that 
Cyrus was wrong on both counts; his 
view was blurred as both Nohria and 
Singh enjoyed excellent credentials. 
Wings # 2: Take-off troubles
More tremors happened in 2014, 
when the Tata Group re-entered the 
aviation sector through Air Asia. This 
was yet another project that Ratan 
desired for several years; his earlier 
efforts had failed. Here, there was 
a family legacy. Jehangir Ratanji 
Dadabhoy Tata, JRD or Jeb, was the 
uncrowned king of the group. For over 
five decades, between 1938 and 1991, 
he had taken it to towering heights, 
before he relinquished the reins to 
Ratan. Aviation was his passion. 
ON the IATA website, a blog 
reads, “His hero was the French 
piloting ace Louis Bleriot, 
the first man to cross the English 
Channel by air. Bleriot lived near the 
Tata’s French county home and once 
allowed a co-pilot to give the 15-yearold JRD a ride. From that moment on, 
JRD was determined to fly.” And set 
up an airline, which he did in 1932. 
Tata Airlines was the first Indian commercial carrier; in 1946, it became Air 
India. After Independence, the airline was nationalised, although JRD 
remained its head until 1978. 
Ratan wanted to relive JRD’s highflying dream. For obvious reasons! 
Moreover, as an owner, he was a risktaker to an extent. He had a 20-, 30-, 
An insider-outsider is a 
tricky person to deal with. 
The owner is always scared 
that the latter, as an 
insider, will try to take over 
the businesses, and as an 
outsider, will want to undo 
past decisions—Cyrus did 
wish to sell the European 
steel business and wind 
down Nano’s operations
COVER STORY
corporate fracas
14 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
40-year vision in his mind. He wasn’t 
affected by today’s facts—the aviation 
sector was in trouble, most airlines 
were in the red, especially the lowfare carriers, and it was difficult to 
raise funds. He was looking at how, 
like Jeb, he will revolutionise the sector over the next decade or so; how he 
will bring world-class management 
and operational practices to India; 
how he will introduce renowned airlines, Air Asia, to the Indian passengers. Air Asia, incidentally, is the first 
foreign airline to set up a subsidiary 
(49 per cent) in the country. Which 
one should be proud of! 
However, in this case, Cyrus 
thought like an outsider, a professional who wished to show instant results. 
Immediate performance generally, 
and especially in the case of a new 
CEO or chairman, implies cutting 
expenses, selling loss-making assets, 
and exiting seemingly-less profitable sectors. Globally, this mindset 
became famous, and quite common, 
in contemporary times during the 
1980s. As a new wave of takeovers and 
mergers, especially leveraged buyouts 
(LBOs), became fashionable, the only 
way the new owners could reduce the 
huge debt required to buy the assets, 
was to sell part of the existing assets, 
and tighten belts. This is exactly what 
Cyrus had in his mind, but he needed 
to act and think like an owner to take 
such crucial and emotive decisions. 
L
OGICALLY, since 2013, he 
opposed or cribbed about the 
entry into the aviation sector. But 
there was a problem—he was neither 
a full-fledged insider, nor a complete 
outsider; he forgot that he was an 
insider-outsider and, hence, he had a 
lot of freedom, but also many strategic shackles. He simply couldn’t wish 
away the aviation partnership. Air 
Asia India was here to stay. 
Wings # 3: Parsi parsimony 
For decades, in some cases a century, the Indian Parsi community, especially the families based in Mumbai 
(or Bombay), earned huge sums from 
the Tata Group. Over the years, they 
had invested, reinvested and re-reinvested their earnings to buy the shares 
of the various companies, especially 
the blue chips like Tata Motor, Tata 
Steel and Tata Consultancy. Over the 
years, they had preserved the shares, 
not sold them, as they witnessed a 
huge rise in their paper profits. In 
addition, they earned huge dividends 
from these companies. Ever since 
Cyrus took over, they were worried, 
even angry and disturbed. 
The reason: the new chairman’s 
thinking like an outsider. As explained 
earlier, Cyrus wanted to show his 
capabilities instantly. Like the twominute Maggie noodles, he hoped to 
prove within months, at least years, 
that he could turnaround the fortunes 
of the group companies. He would be 
better than Ratan; even better, he 
would make people forget Ratan’s 
achievements sooner than anyone 
expected. His instant philosophy: cut 
down the shareholders’ dividends 
of companies that weren’t faring 
well. It piqued the Parsis, especially 
those who thrived on returns from 
their investments. 
Inevitably, the entry of a second 
Cyrus Mistry is the son of Pallonji Mistry, who is called 
the ‘Phantom’ of Bombay House, the Tata headquarters. 
In 2016, the Forbes magazine ranked him as the fifth 
richest Indian with a net worth of just over $14 billion. 
Pallonji is considered a recluse and rarely seen in public, 
although he won the Padma Bhushan in January 2016. 
The Mistry family started with a construction company, 
and became a conglomerate with presence in real estate, 
infrastructure, consumer products, biofuels and textiles. 
Its association with the Tata family and Group goes a long 
way back. Old timers in Bombay House contend that the 
Mistry family got a 10-12 per cent stake in Tata Sons 
initially because it agreed to build the steel and 
automobile plants for the Tatas. The stake went up to over 
18 per cent, and despite other shareholders with a larger 
stake, the family is considered to be the single-largest 
shareholder in Tata Sons. The two families have personal 
relationships too. Pallonji’s daughter, Aloo, is married to 
Noel Tata, Ratan’s half-brother; before Cyrus was 
appointed as Ratan’s successor, it was widely tipped that 
Noel will take over the reins at Mumbai’s Bombay House.
Mistry lineage
www.indianbuzz.com 15 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017
Parsi in the Tata Group, and exit of 
the more famous one, created rifts 
between the rich people within the 
community. Since the first half of this 
century, the Mumbai-based Parsis 
witnessed the loosening of their 
stranglehold over business, wealth 
and power to the Marwari and other 
trading communities. Hence, they 
generally stuck together, helped each 
other, and protected themselves. This 
is evident from the earlier almostfamily-like links between the Tata 
and Mistry, Ratan and Nusli Wadia, 
the business fighter who owns the 
Bombay Dyeing Group, and Ratan 
and Mehli. 
In 1997, the Indian Express published the transcripts from what were 
called the Wadia Tapes or Tata Tapes. 
These related to conversations that 
Wadia had with politicians, political 
middlemen, businesspersons, and 
Tata over what came to be known as 
the Tata Tea Terror controversy. In 
that period, like other businesses, Tata 
Tea, whose operations were in Assam, 
had issues with the militant organisation, ULFA (United Liberation Front 
of Assam). It was alleged that the Tata 
Group had indirectly financed the 
expenditure of ULFA leaders—like a 
free hospital where ULFA leaders and 
members were treated, and foreign 
trips and stays for the leaders. Ratan 
apparently knew ULFA’s chief. 
T
HE tapes and their conversations proved Wadia’s proximity to Ratan, and the former was 
his political trouble-shooter to clean 
up this mess. The transcripts reveal 
that the former was the latter’s Man 
Friday. In addition, Wadia was a 
director in Tata Sons and a number 
of other operational entities. In the 
recent past, and after Cyrus took over, 
Wadia distanced himself from Ratan, 
and got closer to the new chairman. 
The rift in the rich Parsi community 
had begun. Thus, it wasn’t surprising that when Cyrus was kicked out, 
Wadia took his side. In the end, 
Wadia was kicked out of the various 
Tata firms. 
Wadia filed a defamation case 
against Tata Sons, when he was 
ousted as an independent director. 
He claimed that the manner of the 
removal “caused severe prejudice 
to the reputation and goodwill” that 
he enjoyed. In a prescient moment, 
he correctly predicted that it had 
“affected his status as an independent 
director in various other companies 
and will continue to have a cascading effect” in the Indian and global 
business circles. It did to an extent; 
other Tata firms kicked him out 
too. The fissures within the community increased. 
Another fracture among the rich 
Over the years, Parsis had 
invested, reinvested and 
re-reinvested their 
earnings to buy the shares 
of the various companies, 
especially the blue chips 
like Tata Motor, Tata Steel 
and Tata Consultancy. Ever 
since Cyrus took over, they 
were worried, even angry
COVER STORY
corporate fracas
16 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
Parsis was actually rifts with the 
Mistry family. Cyrus has a cousin, 
Mehli, who is a longtime friend of 
Ratan. Somehow Cyrus, whose family is in the construction business, 
had problems with Mehli, who had 
bagged several dredging, shipping 
and barge contracts from Tata Power. 
The then chairman felt that this was 
because of Ratan-Mehli proximity. 
Through his lawyer, Mehli told the 
media that this wasn’t true, and the 
contracts were valued fairly. But the 
two Mistrys couldn’t get along; one of 
them (Cyrus) thought the other ratted 
against him to Ratan, which was why 
he lost his chairmanship. 
Then there were the quakes, which 
added immensely to the Corporate 
tsunamis within the Tata Group, and 
finally drowned Cyrus. 
Quake # 1: Cracks within 
Bombay Club 
I
T wasn’t just the Parsis; the breakdown in the relationships between 
Ratan, Cyrus, Wadia and Mehli 
devastated the bonhomie that they 
enjoyed with the larger business community in Mumbai and the rest of 
India. It was essentially a breakdown 
of the on-and-off informal business 
group, dubbed as the Bombay Club. 
During World War II, and two years 
before India’s Independence, eight 
industrialists headed by JRD (who 
else?) and comprising GD Birla, Sri 
Ram, Kasturbhai Lalbhai, and Sir 
Purshottamdas Thakurdas, published the ‘Bombay Plan’. They were 
the original Bombay Club. The Hindu 
traders and Parsi businessmen had 
got together to secure their future. 
The Plan presented a series of proposals for the Indian government in 
the post-Independence era. Although 
most experts and economists contend 
that the Club argued for larger State 
interventions and public investments 
on State-owned sector, the larger 
intention was ‘protectionism’ of the 
Indian-owned industries against the 
foreigners. This fell under the ‘nationalist’ notions that Indian business was 
unduly exploited by the British and 
British-owned firms. Intuitively, the 
Plan argued ‘for private property’ in a 
nuanced manner. 
Once India glided on the path of 
economic reforms in 1991, similar 
fears gripped the domestic business 
community. In 1993, another group 
of eight industrialists, comprising 
Hindus and Parsis, met at Mumbai’s 
Oberoi Hotel (hence the name, 
Bombay Club), finalised a note, and 
handed it over to Manmohan Singh, 
the Finance Minister. According to 
media reports, it “welcomed competition in the market but urged the government to take steps to ‘enable them 
to play their rightful role in the industrial development of the country’.” 
They were seeking not protectionism, 
but time to prepare for the inevitable foreign onslaught. According to 
journalist Sucheta Dalal, who claims 
to have coined the phrase, Bombay 
Club, its “agenda really was stalling 
and slowing (the) reforms.” 
Although Ratan was not a member 
www.indianbuzz.com 17 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017
of the second Bombay Club, unlike 
JRD who was the head of the first, 
his closest ally, Wadia, was connected 
to it. It’s unclear whether Wadia 
attended the Oberoi meeting, but he 
supported it. Hence, Ratan, without 
coming out openly, did the same. 
If this contention is true, then it is 
clear that the powerful Ambanis—
Dhirubhai and his two sons, Mukesh 
and Anil— who were against Wadia 
and, hence, Ratan, were not part 
of the Bombay Club. In fact, the 
Ambanis had their own privileged 
and premium club, whose members 
were die-hard loyalist, who were few 
in those days. 
Now with the Ratan-Wadia feud, 
and Cyrus-Mehli spat, the final 
nail has been hammered into the 
coffin of any form of an informal 
Bombay Club. 
Quake # 2: Loco about DoCoMo 
The event that happened sixteen 
days before Cyrus’ exit, proved to be 
the ‘tipping point’ or the ‘catalyst’ as 
far as Ratan was concerned. It confirmed that Cyrus would decimate 
the carefully-constructed empire; he 
would devastate every brick in the 
walls of his operational companies. 
It verified that his own ownership in 
Tata Sons, and other companies, and 
his investments were at risk, thanks 
to the past decisions taken by Cyrus 
since he became the chairman. 
For years, there were issues 
between the two partners, Japan’s 
NTT DoCoMo and Tata Teleservices. 
After the former decided to exit the 
venture, it demanded a pre-decided 
price for the shares it owned under 
the pre-decided buyback arrangement with the Tatas. However, as 
similar arrangements existed in the 
case of other deals involving foreign 
partners, the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) stepped in. Any deals on predetermined prices were effectively 
banned. DoCoMo opted for arbitration and won an award for $1.17 billion from the London Commercial 
Court. However, the change in laws 
prevented the Tatas from paying it. 
T
ATA Sons maintained that the 
payment required RBI permission, which was denied. Even 
after DoCoMo approached the Delhi 
High Court to impose the arbitration award, Tata Sons placed the 
entire amount with the court, which 
showed its intention to pay, but as 
per the Indian laws. Hassled by what 
it perceived as Tata Sons’, or rather 
Cyrus’, deliberate delaying tactics, 
the Japanese firm threatened to 
take legal recourse globally to attach 
Tata Group’s assets abroad. Cyrus 
argued that this wasn’t possible 
as the foreign assets belonged to 
Tata Steel and Tata Motor, and the 
promoters had minority shares in 
them. Effectively, the majority stakes 
in, and the assets of, the companies 
belonged to the other institutional 
and individual shareholders. 
On October 8, 2016—Cyrus was 
removed on October 24—DoCoMo 
dropped a corporate warhead. It filed 
COVER STORY
corporate fracas
18 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
a case in a court in New York. This 
effectively put at risk the revenues (its 
assets are generally human resources) and profits of Tata Consultancy, 
which earned more than half of its 
revenues from North America. In 
addition, Tata Sons owns a majority 
74 per cent stake in Tata Consultancy, 
which paid `11,400 crore (2014-15) 
and nearly `6,300 crore (2015-16) as 
dividends to Tata Sons. In both the 
years, TCS’s dividends comprised 95 
per cent and 91 per cent, respectively, 
of the total annual dividends earned 
by Tata Sons. 
No way would an owner risk such 
humungous profits for a part-owner. 
Quake # 3: Sale of family jewels
As mentioned earlier, being an 
insider-outsider confused Cyrus. 
Sometimes, he saw himself as an 
insider, other times as an outsider. 
Unfortunately, there were occasions 
when he behaved like an insider and 
an outsider while dealing with the 
same issue. As mentioned earlier, 
in terms of showing instant results, 
he was clearly an outsider. As mentioned earlier, one of the key traits of 
a CEO-in-a-hurry, or chairman-ina-hurry, is this desire to sell of lossmaking or unproductive assets to 
boost returns and profits percentages. 
Unfortunately, Cyrus, who played this 
role on and off, chose the wrong assets 
to dispose off. 
Cyrus fixed his radar on Tata Steel’s 
global business, and the Nano car project, both of which were the owner’s 
passionate dreams. These were the 
two projects which Ratan felt were his 
real legacies; people would know and 
remember him for a small car which 
was the cheapest in the world, and the 
purchase of a $12-billion Corus Steel 
in the UK. The first established him 
as a doer, an implementer, a visionary, an entrepreneur par excellence. 
The second was his ability to transform the Tata Group as a global MNC, 
larger than whatever any other Indian 
had achieved. Indians have bought 
foreign assets, but none as large and 
as frequently as he had, especially in 
the last decade of his chairmanship. 
DONNING his hat as a professional, Cyrus felt that the Nano 
was losing money, and needed 
to be shut down. It was a wrong project to begin with, for no rhyme or 
reason other than to set up a milestone—cheapest car. It failed to deliver on what it promised; it failed to lure 
the two-wheeler owners to shift to a 
cheap car. Buying an automobile is an 
aspiration, a desire. And Indian consumer didn’t want to own the cheapest car; her first car purchase had to 
be a decent model, one that can firmly 
put her on a middle-class pedestal. 
Tata Steel, or rather the expensive 
Corus Steel, was a millstone around 
Tata Group’s neck. And it was increasingly bringing it down, especially in 
terms of debt. In the beginning, Ratan 
had paid a much higher amount than 
what it was worth, only because of the 
owner-former chairman’s ambitious 
ego. According to a recent article, 
“When Tata Steel bid for Corus Plc 
in 2006, it arranged financing with 
three banks for around $5 billion to 
$6 billion, said the person, who asked 
not to be named because the negotiations were private. 
As the price rose (Ratan kept on 
raising the bid price) in a bidding 
war for the European steelmaker, 
Tata officials found cheaper funding, but would have to pay a break 
fee with the original banks of about 
80 million pounds ($99 million). 
Some executives tried to negotiate a 
cheaper release, but when the matter 
was brought to the attention of Ratan 
Tata, he insisted the original contract 
be honoured, the person said.” Ratan 
did the same, but only as an owner, 
during the DoCoMo arbitration. 
Cyrus decided to put the global 
steel assets on the auction block. It 
was feared that he would wind down 
Nano. Clearly, no owner would stand 
for an outsider-insider, his successor, 
to erode his most-famous legacies. 
It is easy to understand Ratan’s current emotional state. “Over the last 
two months, there has been a definite 
move to damage my personal reputation and the reputation of this great 
group—the Tata Group. And these 
days are very lonely because the 
newspapers are full of attacks, most 
of them unsubstantiated but nevertheless very painful.” g
Cyrus fixed his radar on 
Tata Steel’s global 
business, and the Nano car 
project, both of which were 
the owner’s passionate 
dreams. These were the 
two projects which Ratan 
felt were his real legacies; 
people would know and 
remember him for
www.indianbuzz.com 19 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 10 | January 2017
The first airline founded in the Americas 
and second in the world. 
Avianca is the commercial brand that represents the Latin American airlines integrated in Avianca 
Holdings S.A. The Avianca airlines, specialized in air cargo and passenger transportation, serve more 
than 100 direct destinations in 28 countries throughout the American and European continents with its 
modern fleet of 180 short, medium, and long haul aircraft. 
Through its membership with Star Alliance, Avianca offers the possibility to connect to more than 1,300 
destinations in 192 countries globally. Through LifeMiles, the loyalty program, the airline offers a wide 
range of benefits and travel options to its more than 6 million registered members.
Avianca is saleable in India through interline partner airline document.
For any further information/query, please contact
Tel: + 91 11 41517121/41, Mob: 9818620717 
Email: mns@bird.in, delresv@bird.in, delsales@bird.in 
GOVERNANCE
judiciary mg devasahayam
20 www.gfilesindia.com
gfiles inside the government vol. 10, issue 9 | December 2016 KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH
The best long-term solution for this 
sensitive issue is to establish the IJS 
with appropriate rules and, in the 
interim, judiciary can adopt the 
extant All-India Service Rules with 
suitable modifications
Judicial Conundrum 
The prudent 
way out
www.indianbuzz.com 21 gfiles inside the government
KWWSVWZLWWHUFRPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH KWWSVZZZIDFHERRNF  RPJ¿OHVPDJD]LQH vol. 10, issue 9 | December 2016
A
MIDST the intense cry and 
cacophony over ‘demonetisation’, grievous governance 
wounds that bleed the nation are getting sidelined. Most important among 
them is the Central GovernmentSupreme Court impasse on the 
appointment of High Court judges. 
For quite some time the Central 
government and Supreme Court 
Collegium have been locking horns on 
his issue. The Chief Justice of India 
(CJI) has been blaming the government for not doing enough for 
appointing judges with the Union 
Law Minister responding with a counter accusation. The bone of contention is the Memorandum of Procedure 
(MoP), which will be the Rule governing appointment of judges. Strange as 
it may seem, India’s higher judiciary, 
which adjudicates every law and rule 
in the country, is itself functioning 
without any rule! The Supreme Court, 
in a judgment, struck down the government’s proposal to set up a 
National Judicial Appointments 
Commission (NJAC) for appointment 
of High Court and Supreme Court 
judges. Since the judgment, the government and the collegium have not 
been able to draft the MoP. 
This is because of sharp difference 
of opinion between the two on 
many issues:
Seniority and merit: The 
government wants the criteria of 
seniority, merit and integrity while 
promoting a HC judge to the SC. 
Collegium says the criteria of 
seniority, subject to merit and 
integrity, would be followed.
Power to reject candidates:
The government proposes to retain 
power for rejection of candidates 
recommended on grounds of 
national security/public interest. 
 The collegium is opposed to this, 
saying it amounted to interference in 
its functioning.
Writing down reasons: The 
government wants that in case a 
senior judge is being overlooked for 
elevation to the Supreme Court, the 
reasons for the same be recorded in 
writing and the views of all five judges 
of the collegium must be made known 
to the government. The collegium 
says this will be counter-productive 
and could affect the concerned 
person’s future career as well as 
duties as judge.